[lit-labs/compiler] initial README.md (#4099)
lit/lit: packages/labs/compiler/README.md

# @lit-labs/compiler

A compiler for optimizing Lit templates.

> **Warning** `@lit-labs/compiler` is part of the Lit Labs set of packages – it is published
> in order to get feedback on the design and may receive breaking changes.
> Tracking RFC: https://github.com/lit/rfcs/pull/21

> **Warning** `@lit-labs/compiler` is not yet published so it cannot be installed from npm.

## Overview

`@lit-labs/compiler` exports a [TypeScript

> Transformer](https://github.com/itsdouges/typescript-transformer-handbook#types-of-transformers)

Reviewer: Wouldn't this be a better intro to answering what a typescript transformer actually is?
https://github.com/itsdouges/typescript-transformer-handbook#the-basics

```suggestion
Transformer](https://github.com/itsdouges/typescript-transformer-handbook#the-basics)
```

Author: very much yes. Applied!

that can be run over your JavaScript or TypeScript files to optimize away the

> `lit-html` **prepare** render phase. For template heavy applications this can result in a quicker first render.

Reviewer 2: can we link into how lit-html works?

Author: Great suggestion!

## Usage

This transformer can be used anywhere TypeScript transformers are accepted, which is dependent on your build setup.

Below is an example using [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org/) with the plugin [`@rollup/plugin-typescript`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@rollup/plugin-typescript):

```js
// File: rollup.config.js
import typescript from '@rollup/plugin-typescript';
import {compileLitTemplates} from '@lit-labs/compiler';

export default {
  // ...
  plugins: [
    typescript({
      transformers: {
        before: [compileLitTemplates()],
      },
    }),
    // other rollup plugins
  ],
};
```

> This is based on a rollup config used to test that source-maps are preserved after compilation in the lit repo. See [the test rollup config for a full example](https://github.com/lit/lit/blob/main/packages/labs/compiler/rollup.source_map_tests.js).

Reviewer: I think the wording here is a bit backwards. Rather than this snippet being based on the source-maps test, it's more like the source-maps test shows an example of using this rollup config in situ.

Maybe could reword to..
```suggestion
See an example of the transformer in use in this project's test for source-maps validity in this [rollup config file](https://github.com/lit/lit/blob/main/packages/labs/compiler/rollup.source_map_tests.js).
```

Author: Another great suggestion thank you!

# FAQ

## What are the tradeoffs for using the compiler?

1. Running the compiler requires a build step that can accept a TypeScript transformer.

> 2. The very first template render is faster (sometimes up to 45% faster for template heavy sites), but it currently comes with a 5% output file size increase (gzipped).

Reviewer 2: qualify the 5% with "about"?

Author: Yes! Reworded to make that clearer.

## How do I know optimizations have been applied?

Given your original source code containing the `html` tag function to declare templates:

```js
const hi = (name) => html`<h1>Hello ${name}!</h1>`;
```

This code should have been emitted at the end of your build without the `html` tag function.
E.g. the above authored example is transformed into something like:

```js
const b = (s) => s;
const lit_template_1 = {h: b`<h1>Hello <?></h1>`, parts: [{type: 2, index: 1}]};
const hi = (name) => ({_$litType$: lit_template_1, values: [name]});
```

## What templates are optimized by the compiler?

In order for a template to be optimized by the compiler, it must be:

> 1. A well-formed template that wouldn't raise runtime diagnostics. For example, templates with expressions in [invalid locations](https://lit.dev/docs/templates/expressions/#invalid-locations) will not be compiled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A well-formed template that wouldn't raise runtime diagnostics in development builds of lit-html. For example, templates with expressions in [invalid locations](https://lit.dev/docs/templates/expressions/#invalid-locations) will not be compiled.
```

> 1. Use `html` imported directly from the module `lit` or `lit-html`. The following imports are supported:

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that re-exports are not supported

Author: Done!
